This is chapter 10 of a series of short stories about 1919
and the things that were travelling across the desk with dispatches and intelligence reports
of the then Prime Minister David Lloyd George.
This is about the Canadian soldiers, also waiting to go home,
angry about not being demobbed, and it's Canadian soldiers in riots and death.
Soldiers from other countries, as I've said, were also being denied the demobilisation they expected when they left France.
And two major riots involving Canadian soldiers demonstrate their anger and the end of battlefront discipline.
You have to remember just how rigid discipline is in the battlefront, and then suddenly there's very little.
The first riot was at Kinmel Bay, the army camp near Rhyl, North Wales.
On the 1st of March 1919 the Canadians refused to obey orders.
And on the 4th of March they elected Sapper William Czarowicz, a Russian-born Canadian, as their leader.
Now, due to an administrative error, the soldiers were short of wages and had no money for alcohol and cigarettes.
So they decided to resolve this by looting the officers' canteen and mess,
taking, as an aside, taking the red curtains that were located there and attaching them to poles to make red flags.
They then left the confines of the camp and attacked Tin Town.
Tin Town was a batch of temporary shops owned by local traders and selling goods to the armed forces of the Canadians.
Well, they destroyed 11 of those shops.
The next day matters got even worse when there was an open battle between mutineers and officers,
and non-commissioned officers who were trying to restore order.
In the melee five men died.
Mutineer Gunner Jack Hickman was shot.
Sapper Czarowicz died from a bayonet wound.
Private David Gilland, who was on the officer side, was shot and two others died.
No one was ever convicted for playing a part in the deaths.
Fifty men were court-martialed, resulting in sentences of three months to ten years.
Now, Kimmel Bay was a military riot.
No civilians were involved, unlike the next major Canadian riot in Surrey.
Canadian soldiers were in a convalescence camp in Epsom in Surrey, on the edge of London.
Here were Canadian troops recovering from illness or injury.
It was usual for them to get drunk, etc.
But on the 17th of June 1919, this got out of hand at the Rifleman Pub in Epsom Hybe Street.
One of the soldiers was arrested for fighting with the police.
And then another one, John Connors, when the soldiers tried to stop him being taken to the police station.
Later that night, 400 soldiers attacked the police station using paving stones and railings
to smash their way into the police station where they were met by 20 or so police officers.
In the middle of this, what happened was all of the off-duty police, hearing what was going on,
did their best to get to the police station, cycling, which was their main transport.
And 51-year-old Sergeant Green, an off-duty police officer, cycled to the police station when he realised there was trouble.
But he was struck by a railing during the attack on the station.
Seven men were charged for offences relating to the riot.
Two were acquitted, five convicted only of riot.
And yet Sergeant Green had been killed. No one was charged with his death.
Some were sentenced to a year's imprisonment.
However, in a novel twist, in December 1919, the soldiers were all granted a royal pardon and deported to Canada.
Ten years later, Alan McMaster, one of the men convicted of riot, walked into a police station in Winnipeg, Canada
and confessed to the murder of Sergeant Green.
The British authorities, embarrassed by this problem, decided that the matter had been dealt with and he was freed.
Now Sergeant Green, as I say, died in this riot.
Now in 1985, when P.C. Blakelock was killed in Tottenham in London in a riot,
it was stated he was the first police officer to be killed in a riot in the 20th century.
Now that riot involved black people and it made for a dramatic headline.
But it was factually incorrect.
So the other soldiers were causing just as many problems for David Lloyd George as his own soldiers.